About Finnish
=============

Finnish is not an Indo-European language.  For us, that means that it
shares almost no structure with any other language that most people
know or have learned.   So, when learning it, one has to do a whole
lot more work: it isn't just substituting words for other words, but
decomposing the meaning and re-creating the meaning from the start in
a different grammatical form.  There are also types of grammatical
operations which don't exist other places, which have to be learned.
These are described below.

On the plus side, Finnish is a relatively new language in some sense.
It has been spoken for thousands of years, and had its first writing
system developed around 500 years ago.  However, in the last 200
years, it has been standardized.  As you will learn, Finnish has many
different dialects, none of which is the "standard" Finnish that you
learn in courses.  During the standardization process, they took parts
from the various dialects and (in the usual Finnish way) made a
standard language that was *logical* and *systematic*.  This is
actually a great help in learning it: there actually are some rules
that make things make sense.

The downside to this is the standard Finnish (Kirjakieli=standard
finnish, "book language") is not what anyone speaks.  It is only used
in somewhat official contexts: formal TV programs, children's shows,
official speeches, language courses, etc.  So, even after studying
Finnish for a long time, you may try but be unable to understand what
you hear in your day to day life.  It can be good to browse the
puhekieli(=spoke Finnish, "spoken language") to stay aware of some of
the spoken words, even before you get to it in your courses which
unfortunately usually comes very late.

Finnish is a very syntethic language, not an analytic language like
English.  This means that words change, inflect, and combine very
much.  In Finnish, this is basically how *all* words are formed.  In
English, it is easy to tell what a word is: everything that is
separated by spaces can be directly found in a dictionary and has a
definition.  In Finnish, most words are not used in their standard
form, but instead various derivatives which you will learn about in a
later chapter.

Because of this, it takes some effort to be able to separate the words
(things separated by spaces) into the basic components that you learn
about.  When listening, this is even harder because of the way that
Finnish flows together.

People also use this to make fun of Finnish: "oh, there are so many
words": `ex1`_, `ex2`_, `ex3`_, and so on.  But this is missing the
point: Finnish is syntethic, and the concept of these being different
words isn't quite right.  They are a base modified by different stems,
the equivalent of different words in other languages.  You can't
evaluate Finnish by the criteria of other languages.  Instead, you
will learn how to break these down into their component pieces to
understand them (and really, all these examples are highly
pathological).

.. _ex1: https://imgur.com/QFm6SCE
.. _ex2: https://imgur.com/gallery/NdqH7
.. _ex3: https://imgur.com/JoM4aLU

The grammar of Finnish is very different.  If you know English, and
are learning something like Spanish, it is relatively straightforward:
you can substitute one word for another, and do some various small
changes.  In Finnish, entire sentences need to be reordered to convey
the right thought.  This means that it can be much harder to get
started.  This can mean that real-time production of Finnish requires
a lot of practice and intuition.

Because Finnish comes from a different language family, all of the
basic vocabulary is different.  When learning a "normal" language,
words bay be quite different, but very quickly you start seeing
patterns and connections to some language you know.  That's not the
case in Finnish: you have to learn all-new basic words,
medium-advanced words, *and* advanced words.  The only place where you
get consistent relief is modern technological words - but even that
isn't everywhere, because often it is a literal translation to Finnish
(e.g. "workstation" = "ty√∂asema" = "work station")

Finnish has a fewer sounds than many other languages: many of the
letters in the Latin alphabet aren't used for native Finnish words.
Instead, you get more richness in the usage of fewer letters when they
are turned into syllables.  For example, "tuli" is "fire", and "tuuli"
is "wind".  In English, letters don't necessarily mean anything about
the pronunciation, but in Finnish pronunciation is essential.
Jokes: `ex4`_.

.. _ex4: https://imgur.com/yReMTKL

Finally, I believe that in many cases Finnish is hard to learn because
of the way it is taught.  In many cases, it is thought as a "total
immersion" method.  This works in many languages, where there is
enough similarity that you can pick up *something*, and then work your
way to the rest.  But Finnish is so different there is not really
anything to pick up on unless you start as if you are a child learning
your first language.  Even living in this country for a few years
doesn't necessarily let you see the patterns without some help.  Why
is this?  Every language is built on some basic components, and you
recognize these components and work up to a larger understanding.  In
Finnish, the components are so different that it takes a lot of time
to build up to them.  Even in modern "machine learning" techniques,
some sort of basic features are programmed in and used to infer the
rest: you don't learn patterns with absolutely no context.
Unfortunately Finnish is so different that there's hardly any context
to start with, and most people with jobs which don't require Finnish
don't get the type of immersion they need.

The very purpose of this course is to solve this problem: to teach you
the basic components of Finnish, so that you can understand what you
are seeing.  This will make learning Finnish much more enjoyable, and
also give you a greater chance of picking up some over time.
