=======================================================
Word endings (noun cases) and word changes (declension)
=======================================================

Most of you have probably heard that "Finnish doesn't have
prepositions".  Actually, that's not entirely true, but it is true in
spirit.  As we discussed, Finnish is a syntethic language, and instead
of using prepositions (modifier words), it directly attaches suffixes
to the words they modify.  When they are added to the words, there are
two main parts:

First, knowing what stem to use.  This is hard, because there isn't a
one-to-one mapping of usage to other languages.  However, prepositions
are *always* hard in other languages, because they never are
one-to-one maps.

Second, suffixes aren't directly, attached, there can be word
changes.  This may seem difficult at first, and it does take some
getting used to.  However, as in most things in Finnish, it ends up
being quite logical.

There are two main thing you need to be able to do:

* First, you have to be able to apply endings to words.  This is both
  knowing what to use, and how to do the word changes.
* Second, and maybe not as obvious, is being able to look at a word
  and go backwards to discover the stem and extension.  This is hardly
  ever mentioned, but actually does require some practice.  To read Finnish
  easily, this needs to be automatic.  When reading a new word, you
  should read from beginning to end and end to beginning at the same
  time.



The noun case endings
=====================

There are different types of endings: the basic noun cases, particles
that have some sort of emphasis, and many other types.

Below, you can see the table of the basic endings.  There are more,
and we aren't going to try to explain them right now --- you'll learn
them them in real courses.  For now, we are just looking at the
overall patterns.

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   , Name,  ending, meaning,
   **Basic**,
   , Nominative, -                        , basic form             , (base)
   , Nominative plural, ``-t``            , basic form plural      , closed (weak)
   , Genitive,  ``-n``                    , possessive or object   , closed (weak)
   , Partitive, ``-a``, ``-ta``, ``-tta`` , part                   , (base)
   **Locative**,                          ,                        ,
   , Illative, ``-vn``                    , to inside              , open (strong)
   , Inessive, ``-ssa``                   , inside                 , closed (weak)
   , Elative , ``-sta``                   , from inside            , closed (weak)
   , Allative, ``-lle``                   , to                     , closed (weak)
   , Adessive, ``-lla``                   , on, by                 , closed (weak)
   , Ablative, ``-lta``                   , from                   , closed (weak)
   **Other**
   , ...
   **Plural**
   , Plural, ``-i-`` + other ending       , plural                 , depends on other ending

We see three main categories: nominative is the base form of a word
and partitive uses the base form (which is usually strong).
The Illative uses the strong form of the word, and
most others use the weak form.  The main point of this chapter is
learning how to form the words, and for that this is the most
important point.

There are more endings:

* Possessive suffixes: ``-ni`` (my), ``-si`` (yours), ``-mme`` (our),
  ``-nne`` (yours, plural), ``-nsa`` (his, hers, their, singular or
  plural).  These take the ... form.  TODO

* Enclitic Particles: ``-ko``, ``-han``, ``-pa``.  These convey some
  mood or emphasis in speaking.

* ... and more.

**Remember vowel harmony!**  In a word without ``a``, ``o``, ``u``,
we get the changes ``a→ä``, ``o→ö``, and ``u→y`` in *all* suffixes.
It's not even worth writing both forms, so I don't ever.



Reminder: syllable formation
============================

Let's review something from a few chapters ago: syllable formation.

Summary: Syllables start at every consonant before vowels, and between vowels
that don't form a dipthong.  So a word might be segmented this way:
``kvk·kv·kv``.

A syllable ``kv`` is open, and a syllable ``kvk`` is closed.  If a
single ``k`` is added to an open syllable, it becomes closed: ``kv`` +
``-k`` → ``kvk``.  Same with ``kv`` + ``-kkv`` → ``kvk·kv``.

A long vowel (the same vowel letter twice in a row) also effectively
makes a syllable open regardless of what is at the end.  So ``-kaan``
is open, but ``-kan`` and ``-kain`` (dipthong) are not.



Consonant gradation
===================

Finnish has a concept called *consonant gradation*.  It is almost
exactly what it says: the consonant changes between two grades, strong
and weak.  Strong consists of something harder (e.g. ``p``), and the
weak consists of something softer (e.g. ``p`` → ``v``).

As with everything in languages, there's no single reason for this.
But you can consider it as somehow making the language flow better:
when a syllable is open at the end of the word, it can end more
harshly.  But when it becomes something in the middle of the word, it
has to flow better.

The following are the basic consonant gradation patterns in Finnish
(there are a few more, but they are infrequent enough we don't need to
mention them now)

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   Strong (open), weak (closed)
   ``k``, ``-``
   ``p``, ``v``
   ``t``, ``d``
   ``kk``, ``k``
   ``pp``, ``p``
   ``tt``, ``t``
   ``nk``, ``ng``
   ``mp``, ``mm``
   ``nt``, ``nn``
   ``lt``, ``ll``
   ``rt``, ``rr``

So, for example, ``katu`` + ``-t`` becomes ``kadut``, and
..p.. becomes ..v..

``st``, ``sp``, ``sk``, and ``tk`` don't change

Many students will think of these as highly annoying and problematic.
However, they are simple if thought of in terms of open and closed
syllables.  **In fact, it is best to not think of these as being word
changes: imagine the word exists as a quantum superposition of both
forms occurring at the same time.** You see one particular form
written down depending on if it is observed in an open syllable or
closed syllable.

Primarily, these happen in the last syllable of the word, depending on
what ending is applied: if it's a closing ending (``-t``, ``-n``,
``-ssa``, etc) or a non-closing ending.

Secondarily, it happens before the last syllable, but only when there
are changes that have effects that open or close a syllable.

A syllable that has a long vowel (two of the same in a row) in it is
always open: imagine that the long sound insulates the front from the
back of the syllable.  This leads to words where consonant gradation
*should* apply, but is always in the strong form.


Stems from basic forms
======================

If you have a word like ``puhelin`` (phone), you can't just add an
ending like ``-n`` to it because it would break the syllable pattern
(no more than two consonants in a row).  So, before you can add
endings, every word is converted to some form that ends in a vowel.

The **base form** is the nominative, and the **inflectional stem** is
the form which most endings are added to.  The inflectional stem can
be observed in both strong and weak forms usually or sometimes.  The
inflectional stem is the same as the base form when it's already
suitable for adding stems (when it ends in a vowel).

A word like ``ovi`` (door) is directly able to take any ending: the
base form is the same as the stemp

*Note: There are various examples below for your information, but for
now just look at the general patterns.  You will learn these as you go
through your regular lessons, and as you do it will make a lot more
sense.*

``-i`` to ``-e``.  Why?  Because ``-i-`` is for plural, so basically
everything gets changed to ``-e-`` for singular, *except* some modern
loanwords.

A word like ``-as`` (``vieras``) becomes ``-aa`` (``vieraa-``).
Similar thing can happen with ``-is``.  This unconditionally opens the
last syllable (because of the long vowel) causes reverse consonant
gradation (``a·su·kas`` → ``a·su·kaa-``) in *all* forms: it doesn't
matter what stem is attached, unlike the normal case where the stem
affects the gradation.

A word like ``-nen-`` (``nai·nen``) becomes ``-se-`` (``nai·se-``).  You
can try to rationalize this by imagining the ``n`` becomes ``s`` and
the last ``n`` removed.

A word like ``pu·he·lin`` becomes ``pu·he·li·me-``.  ``n`` becomes ``m``
which makes you somehow think of consonant gradation, and ``e``
is added.

A word like ``-us`` (``vas·taus``) becomes ``-ukse``
(``vas·tau·kse-``).  A ``k`` appears out of nowhere, which is actually
reverse consonant gradation so it sort of makes sense.  An ``e`` also
is added.

A word like ``-e`` (``ha·me``) becomes ``-ee-`` (``ha·mee-``), which
causes reverse consonant gradation.  This also opens a syllable (because of
the long vowel), so can cause reverse consonant gradation: ``kaa·de``
→ ``kaa·tee-``.

There are lots of different words that end in ``-i``.  Most of them
become ``-e-`` in the stem, but new loanwords stay as ``-i-`` (new
loanwords generally don't obey old patterns).  There are also "old
Finnish words" that have a different category: partitive is different
(``pieni`` + partitive → ``pienta``).  So, when understanding ``-i``
words, classify them into three categories: very old Finnish words,
Finnish words, and modern loanwords.

These are just some examples.

There are *many* different types of stem changes, but most fit into
some major categories.  KOTUS classifies them into about 50 different
types, but there is a lot of effective duplication based on exact
letters and forward/reverse consonant gradation: however, in effect,
many of these differences can be understood based on the rules
described above, so the effective amount you have to learn is a lot
smaller.  Wiktionary has a `list of Kotus types <kotustypes>`_, but I
don't think the list is that accurate or useful: however, wiktionary
is good if you know a word and want to know it's inflection, or vice
versa.

.. _kotustypes: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Finnish_nominal_inflection



Forming the endings
===================

After the above is known, it's fairly easy to form the endings.

Partitive adds ``-a`` to words that ends in one vowel, ``-ta`` to
words that end in one consonant or a long vowel, and ``-tta`` to a
word that ends in ``-e``.  Why the special ``e``?  It used to be a
different type of sound, so is treated specially.  You notice that
``e`` is special a lot above.

The illative adds ``-Vn`` to stems that end in a single vowel (``V``
represents a doubling of the previous vowel), ``-hVn`` to a stem that
ends in two vowels.

Most of the other stems are just added, and consonant gradation is
applied if needed.

When learning a new ending, the two important things to learn are: is
it applied to the base form or stem, and does it close the last
syllable (strong or weak)?



Plural
======

To form plural words, the basic rule is to add an ``-i-`` to the stem,
then whatever other ending.  It seems more complicated because of some
rules, but they are actually quite standard.

Diphtongs mutate: ``ie`` + ``-i-`` → ``ei``.  ``uo`` + ``-i-`` →
``oi``.  ``yö`` + ``-i-`` → ``öi``.

There can be vowel changes in partitive: ``viv`` (``v``\ =a vowel)
becomes ``vjv``.

Double vowels become a dipthong: ``vv`` + ``-i-`` → ``vi``
(``vv``\ =same vowel twice).

There are lots of other complexities, but you can understand them
based on this.



Overall diagram
===============

TODO



Notes
=====

Remember, it is best to not think of consonant gradation as a real
change of the word.  The word stem exists in both formats
simultaneously, and you happen to observe it in strong or weak form
depending on if it is closed or open.

There are different complexities, but can still be understood in this
framework.  For example, ``-ton`` looks like it's doesn't close the
syllable, but actually it does.  This is because of historical
reasons: originally the suffix was ``-ttojn``, which would close the
word.

There are other changes, such as ``uku`` to ``uvu`` and ``yky`` to
``yvy``.  These are much more rare, but you will learn about them later.

There are also occasional vowel changes, because you can't have too
many vowels in a row.  For example, ``i`` becomes ``j``  between other
vowels.  So, you get more complex things like ``aika`` + ``-n`` →
``aikan`` → ``aian`` → ``ajan``.

In addition to the complexity of remembering all of these, it can also
just make general awareness of the language harder.  It can be easy to
remeber ``maito``+``-n`` → ``maidon``, but if you are just quickly
reading and you see ``maidon``, it looks like a much different word
from ``maito``!  It takes a lot of internalizing to make all of these
equivalences.

It also takes some practice to resolve ambiguity: In a word, would
``t`` become ``d`` (consonant gradation), or ``tt`` (reverse consonant
gradation)?  It takes practice and experience to keep all the word
changes between all the different endings straight.
